All right, so picking up from where we left off, let's create a few more records.
So we created this one person here so we can actually reuse this line here and just change the values
in it to create additional people.
We're not going to make a whole lot of people here, but let's just make a few.
So let's make a few people in one family with the same surname.
Okay, so we've got Harry.
Let's create a jack.
And I don't know.
Let's say that Jack was born in 2000 and.
Jan?
10:00 at 8:45.
And Jack makes.
50000.
All right.
And so to create that record, all I need to do now is just do a controlled return or I can click that
little button there, someone to do a control return.
All right.
And then down here, I see that that was successfully inserted.
And let's create a few more.
So we've got Jack.
Let's create a Mary Johnson.
And two thousand three and five.
Thirteen.
And 17.
30 and you can put in whatever values you want here, this doesn't matter.
And Mary kind of young, right?
So let's say that Mary makes.
So I don't know, 2000 bucks per year and let's enter her.
All right.
And let's get a mom in here, Susan Johnson born.
Born in 1951.
October.
Thirty four, so she's kind of spooky and 19.
Thirteen.
And mom makes.
Let's give mom a big salary, 200000 bucks.
All right.
Unless into her.
OK, and then let's get one person who's not in the family.
Just we have an oddball here, Jake.
Smith.
Jake is born 1970, and I don't care about the rest of that.
All right.
Let's enter Jake.
And let's see, and Jake's salary is.
75000, let's enter, Jake.
All right.
So now let's see if we've actually got all of these people, so I'm moving my cursor down here to the
select star from People line, and I'm just going to do a control return to run that line.
And now we've got five people in the database Harry, Jack, Mary, Susan and Jake, right?
So they're all here with all their different salaries and different dates of birth and all that good
stuff.
So now we have enough data that we can actually do a little bit of playing around with some more of
the capabilities of sequel and the database.
So the first thing I want to look at with you is a little bit more about this select statement here.
So as you can already see, this allows us to query the database for data that's in it, starting with
the table here.
Obviously, we're able to tell the database what table we want to query data from.
So in this case, it's the people table.
We could create additional tables here and we could query data from them.
We could even query data from multiple tables at the same time, especially if there is any data that
is in common between two or more tables.
And this star here, or asterisk, indicates that we want to return all of the columns from that table,
but we don't have to do this.
We could actually specify specific columns that we're interested in.
So if I put my cursor here and specify first name and then execute that line.
We only get back the first names, so obviously we could do last name or whatever.
We could also query for any number of columns, so maybe I want first name, comma, last name and I'll
execute that.
All right.
And so now we get back those two columns, right?
So you can get back any number of columns you want or you can get back all of the columns.
It is often said that it can be more efficient to be explicit with what columns you want rather than
using asterisk.
I think a big part of that has to simply do with the fact that in a lot of professional databases,
there are a lot of columns, and why would you bring back more data than you actually needed?
So in addition to these capabilities, we can also filter just like we did with the Streams API.
Now this is actually one of the interesting differences between some of the capabilities of Java versus
sequel.
And what I mean by that is, by default, there isn't a great equivalent in Java to our ability in school
to specify individual columns that we want to get back.
So imagine if we created a bunch of people objects in Java and put them into an array list, and we
treated the array list sort of like a database here.
And then we said.
Give me back just the first name and last name of all of these people from that array list, like maybe
using the Streams API or something like that.
There's not a real great natural Java way to do that because Java being an object oriented language.
It really wants to operate at the object level or the class level, right?
So you could get back entire objects.
But first name and last name are just components of the person or people object, right?
It's not the entire class.
And so that can sometimes lead to a bit of a mismatch when we want to translate between data that we're
getting from a database versus data that we're pulling in to Java.
So keep that mismatch in mind.
We might we might revisit this concept later now, just as we were able to filter objects with the Streams
API in Java.
We can filter records with sequel as well.
And it's pretty simple to do in a number of ways.
So first off, let's just filter this data set to only give us the people whose last name is Johnson,
right?
So we'll just get the people in the same family.
So to do that, we can start off with this same query.
Or I could change this back to a star, in fact.
Yeah, let me, I guess for now, I will change that back to a star or asterisk.
So select everybody from people, select everything from people and to do our filtering.
We use the where clause.
Where last name.
Equals and then I just provided with a string Johnson.
Just like that.
So if I execute this.
There we go now.
I have all the Johnsons and I don't have Jake Smith.
Now there are a whole lot of things that we could do with this where clause, and I'm not going to exhaustively
show all of them here, but I will show a few of the key ones.
So here we're doing a literal match on the last name field, but we could also do things like partial
matches.
So, for example, I could query for everybody whose last name starts with J.
So to do that, I won't use an equals sign.
I will now use the like method where last name is like.
And then I can do something like J.
Percent saying so that percent sign acts as a matter, if you will.
OK, so let's see what this will do.
All right.
So that also gives us back Jonathan, and we could use that in a number of ways so I could remove the
J and put something like ASO in.
Let's see what that does.
OK, so that works, too.
How about querying for Jake?
So his last name is Smith.
So let's do as m percent sign.
OK, so there's Jake.
How about querying for people whose first names begin with Jay?
First name like.
Capital, J percent.
OK, so then we get Jack and Jake, so you get the idea there, that percent sign can be really flexible.
And then let's also query and filter data based on other data types besides the VAR cars or strings.
So let's say that we want to query based on salary.
So let's first grab everybody.
Whose salary?
Is greater than.
And I don't know, let's say greater than 99000.
OK.
All right, so we got Harry and Susan, because they're making 100000 and 200000, respectively.
Or we could query by date.
So let's filter for everyone who was born before 1980.
Okay, so where date of birth is less than?
And so we're comparing dates here.
So what we need to do is specify the keyword date and then we can provided with a date.
So I will say something like 1980 and we can just do January 1st like so.
And then let's run that.
And there we go.
So that returned.
Everyone who's date of birth is before 1980.
So this is another reminder of something that I've mentioned before in Java, which is that whenever
possible, it's usually better to model not only Java classes, but even database tables with meaningful
and proper data types so that we can get meaningful comparisons when we need to do things like this.
If I had modeled the date of birth as text by using a bar car right, which is the sequel equivalent
of a string, it would have been a bit more problematic for me to be able to then say, Show me all
the people who were born before a certain date or after a certain date or something like that, I'd
have had to go through another step of translating those text representations of dates into actual dates
that have meaning to them.
So it's almost always better in most cases to model your data with accurate data types that really represent
whatever the concept of those values is right.
And we could even get a little fancier and do compound statements and things so we could say something
like find everybody who was born before 1980.
And.
First name.
It is like.
H.
Meaning, you know, first name starts with an H.
Let's try that out.
There you go.
So now you're just getting Harry Johnson back so you can do these compound things or you could say or
so.
Pretty, pretty cool flexibility there.
All right.
So see here.
Let's go back to the basic forms like everything from people.
All right.
So there's everybody.
Now we can also sort or order records.
And that's one of the many strong suits of relational databases.
So to do that, we use a special set of keywords which are ordered by.
And then all we have to do is tell it what column we want to order everything by or columns.
We can specify primary and secondary and tertiary and so on and so forth.
Columns by which to order records.
So let's start with something simple.
So let's just do something like let's order by the first.
The names first name.
All right.
So now what we end up with is all of these records are sorted by first name in alphabetical order ascending.
Now we could also flip that and sort them in descending order.
And if we want that, all we do is add in the DC keyword there.
That means descending.
So if we run this again now, we just flipped the order.
Susan, Mary, Jake, Jack and Harry, OK.
And by the way, if you ever needed to explicitly say that you wanted to sort everything in ascending
order, though, that is the default.
You could say AC.
So there you go.
And then if we wanted to have a secondary sort order, we could do that as well, so we could sort secondarily
by date of birth or salary or anything, we can put a comma here and then specified date of birth.
Now, I don't think I saw anything change there.
Let's see if we do descending.
Yeah, I don't think we're going to.
I don't know that I'm seeing any any change there.
In fact, it might be better if we did date of birth first.
Let's try that and see.
Date of birth, order by date of birth.
And I don't know.
Let's go in descending order.
And then secondarily, let's order by first name.
Oops.
First name.
Let's see what that does.
OK, so yeah, we've got the youngest person first and the oldest person last.
And actually, I mean, of course, the secondary sort order really isn't going to come into play here
in this case, unless we have two or more people with the same date of birth.
So that's not really doing anything for us.
But now you get to see how you could do that.
And what if we wanted to group these people up by some column?
You may recall that we were able to do a grouping in the Streams API, and that felt very database ish
to me when we were doing it.
And whenever I use that functionality in Java, I always assume that the makers of Java were heavily
influenced by the same types of typical functions that you would do in a database.
So let's see what that looks like in the originating technology here.
So let's say that we wanted to group these records by last name and we wanted to do a reduce in the
reducing function.
We want to sum up the salaries.
OK, so we're going to group by last name and then get us some, which really means that we're going
to get the grand total salary for the Johnsons vs. Jake Smith, right?
All right.
So the way we can do that is a couple of things here.
First, we can get rid of this order by and then we're going to replace that with the keywords group
I.
And then all we have to do is specify what column we want to group by.
So last name, for example, and then over here in the beginning, though, we're not going to select
everything now.
Now we're going to select basically the salary.
However, we want to implement a function on this salary.
And so now we also are going to see about functions.
There are lots of functions that we can use with each with school and with the H2 databases implementation
of sequel.
And so the function that we would need here is called sum.
And so I can use the sum function with parentheses and then state what field I want to sum up, which
is the salary field like, sir.
All right.
So select some of the salary from people and group the people by last name.
So if I run this, there we go.
So we get the same salary and we get it.
What is that?
Three hundred fifty two thousand for the for the family and 75000?
Now I could also include something some additional information.
So if I want to get the last name.
For example, right, so now we know who's who.
Right, the Johnsons are getting that much and Smith is getting that much, or perhaps they want an
average.
There's an average function that we could use a.
Now, notice that that's returning the numbers in, I guess that's engineering notation of scientific
notation.
If we want to make that a little nicer to look at, we can actually cast these values.
So similarly to casting in Java, where we can cast one data type to another data type.
We can do something like that in the in SQL as well.
So we will use the cast function here and I will wrap this average salary inside of the function and.
Close that off, but then I need to say as some some data type, and let's try.
What is this big big tent?
Let's see what that looks like.
OK, yes.
So that works.
So now we get 88000 as the average for Johnson and seventy five thousand, he's the only one in there.
So the average is going to be the same as his original salary.
And there are quite a number of functions that we can utilize in sequel.
So let me bring the browser window over here and I will show you some of those functions and will try
out a few of them as well.
Now I'm back on the H2 database website and I to get to this, I just went down to functions there.
And so there's numeric functions.
These would be a lot of these numeric functions would be somewhat equivalent to a lot of the functions
that you would find in Java on the math class math that pi math, whatever.
So these are those similar types of functions and then their string functions, many of which would
be similar to the types of functions that you would find on the string class.
We've got functions for date and time and date.
We won't go over what the system functions are, but these are the main types that you might find yourself
wanting to utilize from time to time.
OK, so in the next lesson, let's take a deeper look into the various functions that are available
to us, both with sequel and with H2 database specifically.
Keep in mind, H2 is just one of several sequel compatible databases and one of several that implements
the GDC Driver standard as well.
So many databases, while being fairly standard in their abilities to implement the sequel language,
will also implement some of their own specific or native capabilities.
And so when we look at some of the functions in the next lesson, some of those may be standard sequel
functions.
Others may be more specific to H2 database.
All right, so we'll take a look at that in the next lesson.